# DevOps Introduction
**Tutor:** A.R. Shankar By Valaxy Technologies valaxyteach@gmail.com

DevOps is a set of practices that combines software development (Dev) and IT operations (Ops). The aim is to enhance the software development lifecycle through continuous delivery with high quality.

**Roles of DevOps Engineer:** DevOps engineers manage the deployment of code from developers onto servers, ensuring adherence to development rules and conditions set by developers.

## Technology Stack Covered:
Git (Version Control), Jenkins (CI), Maven (Build), SonarQube (Code Analysis), JFrog Artifactory (Artifact Repository), Docker (Containerization), Ansible (Deployment & Configuration Management), Kubernetes (Container Orchestration), Prometheus (Monitoring), and Grafana (Alerting).

# Devops Tools 
1. Developer give the  code to the devops and te devops engineer copy the code to the server
2. The devops need to compile and deploy it on test and prod servers
3. The prod should be up, running all the time

### Source Code Management: Git
Manage and maintain source code versions.

### Compilation: Maven
- **Purpose:** Compiles source code into executable artifacts.

### Integration: Jenkins
- **Purpose:** Automates integration of various stages of the development pipeline.

### Deployment: Ansible
- **Purpose:** Automates deployment of applications onto servers.

### Infrastructure:  AWS, Docker, Kubernetes
Provides the necessary infrastructure (servers, containers) for deploying applications.

### Monitoring: Prometheus
Monitors and ensures the uptime and performance of applications and servers.

**Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC**):** The SDLC involves stages from client requirements to production deployment, including continuous development, integration, deployment, testing, and monitoring.



# Resources

## Acoounts
+ GitHub Account: Required for version control and collaboration on code repositories.
+ AWS Account: Needed for cloud computing services and infrastructure provisioning.
+ DockerHub Account: Necessary for storing and managing Docker container images.

## Additional Software:
+ MobaXterm or Putty (Windows): Required for SSH connections to servers.
+ Terminal (MacOS): Terminal is built-in and can be used for SSH connections.
+ Gitbash: Useful for Git commands on Windows.



# Create AWS Acoount
**Summary:**
In this lecture, we will learn how to create an AWS Free Tier Account, which is essential for setting up a Linux server and useful for using AWS or DevOps services in the future.

1. **Google Search:**
   - Open Google and search for "AWS Free Tier account."
   - Click on the first result to go to the AWS Free Tier page.

2. **Create Account:**
   - Click on "Create a Free Account."
   - Provide your email, password, and AWS account name.

3. **Account Type:**
   - Choose between a Professional or Personal account. 
   - Fill in your personal information and continue.

4. **Payment Information:**
   - Provide your credit or debit card details and PAN card if necessary.
   - AWS will deduct a small amount for verification.
   - Enter the OTP to verify your payment information.

5. **Identity Verification:**
   - Provide your phone number for validation via SMS or voice call.
   - Enter the received verification code to continue.

6. **Support Plan:**
   - Choose a support plan: Basic (no technical support), Development, or Business (faster technical support).
   - For learning purposes, select the Free Tier account.

7. **Sign In:**
   - Log into the AWS Management Console using your root user email and password.
   - Navigate to "All services" and select "EC2" under Compute for Linux practice.

8. **Account Activation:**
   - Verify your email address to fully activate your account.
   - Check your email for verification messages from AWS.
   - Click on the link in the email to access your account.

9. **Access EC2 Services:**
   - Once verified, you can access EC2 services and create EC2 instances.

# Set Up an EC2 Instance and Install Git
EC2 stands for Elastic Compute Cloud. It is a web service provided by Amazon Web Services (AWS) that allows users to rent virtual computers on which they can run their own applications. EC2 
## Steps
1. Create an AWS Account
2. Launch a Linux EC2 Instance
3. Connect to the instance
4. Install git: `yum install git -y` or  `sudo apt install git`




## Launch a Linux EC2 Instance
   - **AWS Management Console**: Go to your AWS Management Console.
   - **Choose Region**: Select a region.
   - **EC2 Dashboard**: Go to `All Services` -> `EC2`.
   - **Launch Instance**: Click on `Launch instance`.
   - **Choose AMI**: Select `Amazon Linux`.
   - **Instance Type**: Choose `t2.micro` for free usage.
   - **Configure Instance Details**: No changes needed.
   - **Add Storage**: No changes needed.
   - **Add Tags**: Name your instance (e.g., Developer2_System).
   - **Configure Security Group**: Create a new security group (e.g., Git_SG) with port 22 open for SSH.
   - **Review and Launch**: Review settings and launch the instance.
   - **Key Pair**: Create and download a key pair. You should give it a name and click on the Download button. It will download a .pem file.\n
   With this key you can connect to your instance from other computer using MobaXterm. 
   - **IPv4**: After creating the instance click on it to see the details. Write the IPV4 public IP if you want to connect it from MobaXterm.

## **Connect to the EC2 Instance**

### Using MobaXterm
Download and install MobaXterm. Open MobaXterm.
- Go to `Session` -> `SSH`.
- Enter the public IP address of your instance under Remote Host.
- Go to `Advanced Settings` -> `Use private key` and select your downloaded key pair. Navigate to the location of the .pem file.
- Set the username to `ec2-user` and connect.


### Using CLI on Linux
1. **Create a Folder for the SSH Key:** This creates a directory named `keys` in your home directory if it doesn’t already exist.
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/keys
   ```
2. **Move the Key to This Folder:**
   If you need to move the `.pem` file to this directory, use:
   ```bash
   mv {/path/to/your-key.pem} ~/keys/
   ```
3. **Change the File Permissions:** This sets the file permissions so that only the owner can read the file, and no one can write to or execute it.
   ```bash
   chmod 400 ~/keys/{your-key}.pem
   ```

4. **Verify the Permissions:** The output should show `-r--------` for the permissions of the file, indicating that only the owner has read access.

   ```bash
   ls -l ~/keys/your-key.pem
   ```

5. **Connect Using SSH:**
   ```bash
   ssh -i ~/keys/your-key.pem ec2-user@203.0.113.0
   ```
   - `-i ~/keys/your-key.pem` specifies the path to your private key file.
   - `ec2-user` is the username on the remote server. This is AWS username for ec2. Adjust this based on the actual username for your instance.
   - `203.0.113.0` is the public IP address of the remote server. Replace it with the actual IP or hostname of your server.

6. **Close:** When ytou finished, closing the terminal window may not properly terminate the SSH session and is not the preferred method. Use `logout` or `exit`.

Ensure that the remote server is reachable and that the SSH service is running on the server.

### Make it more simple: SSH Configuration
If you frequently connect to this EC2 instance, you might want to set up an SSH configuration file (`~/.ssh/config`) to simplify the command. Here's an example configuration:

1. Edit the config gfile: `nano ~/.ssh/config` and add the follwoing
   ```text
   Host my-ec2-instance
       HostName {ip adress of the remote instance}
       User {the name of the user}
       IdentityFile {the path to the ssh key}
   ```

   With this configuration, you can connect using:

   ```bash
   ssh my-ec2-instance
   ```
