# Multiple Components and Fragments
When your component becomes big you can create nested components. Try to do it only if the can be reusable.\
if the child component need data from the parent, you can pass it via props
Props is a communication between parent and a child component

parent: you include the child `<Child>` and then pass is the data `<Child title="This is title">` 
child: access the data via props object that it passed to every component
```
export const Child =(props) => {
	return(
			<h1>{props.title}</h1>
		)

}

```

# Props: In-Depth Introduction
1. Destructuring: You can destrcutre the props object
If you relay on propos you will see the the repat the word props a lot. Take a look:
```jsx
const MyComponent = (props) => {
  return (
    <div>
      <h2>Hello, {props.name}!</h2>
      <p>You are {props.age} years old.</p>
      <p>Here are some of your hobbies:</p>
      <ul>
        {props.hobbies.map((hobby, index) => (
          <li key={index}>{hobby}</li>
        ))}
      </ul>
    </div>
  );
};
```
here you destructure the props object. The code is more readable and easy to understand
```jsx
import React from 'react';

const MyComponent = ({ name, age, hobbies }) => {
  return (
    <div>
      <h2>Hello, {name}!</h2>
      <p>You are {age} years old.</p>
      <p>Here are some of your hobbies:</p>
      <ul>
        {hobbies.map((hobby, index) => (
          <li key={index}>{hobby}</li>
        ))}
      </ul>
    </div>
  );
};

export default MyComponent;


```
2. Keys: the key should be pass to the child, but shoudln't be used as a prop. 
```jsx
const MyComponent = ({ items }) => {
  return (
    <ul>
      {items.map((item) => (
        <li key={item.id}>{item.name}</li>
      ))}
    </ul>
  );
};
```
```jsx
const MyComponent = ({ items }) => {
  return (
    <ul>
      {items.map((item) => (
        <Card key={item.id} name= {item.name} /> 
      ))}
    </ul>
  );
};
```
The `key` attribute serves as a special identifier for each element in a list when rendering with React.\
If you place the `key` attribute inside the `Card` component like `<li key={item.id}>`, React would interpret the `key` as a regular prop of the `Card` component, rather than a special identifier for the list item. React requires the `key` attribute to be specified directly on the top-level element being rendered within the `map` function, in this case, the `<Card>` component.
By placing the `key` directly on the `<Card>` component within the `map` function, React can properly track and update each individual `<Card>` component when the list changes. This ensures efficient rendering and helps maintain the correct state of each item within the list.

# Props: Children
Your component can have children also.
You can insert elements inside your component declaration. Instead of <Child />
you can do <Child attribute="..."> <p> ....</p> <p>..</p></Child>
But your component don't know where to inject them. They will be passed as props. The propos will contain data passed as attributes + nested children.
ойой```jsx
export const Chilf= ({attribute, children}) => {
  <div className={`box ${attribute}`}>
    {children}
  </div>
}
```


# Prop Drilling
Drilling is passing data as props from parent to grandchildrens. It is problematic when the app become bigger and more complex. The solution is state managment.