# Global Level Styling
1. All fonts and icons should be there so they can be accessed by all the components
`@imprt url(...)`
2. Variables
```css
:root{
	--theme-border: #d4d4d4;
}
```
use it: `border-bottom: 1px solid var(--theme-border)`
3. Reset css
```css
* {
	margin: 0px;
	pading: 0px;
	font-family: ...;
}
```
4. Common and reusable CSS

# Component Level Styling
give the responsibilty of styling a certin component to a spereate componentName.css file. It will kepp the App.css and index.css lean and maintanable.
The **Scope** of such a file will be global. It will apply to all the app because all React does it inject it to a `<style>` element . If you want the scope to be local see section Module Level Styling.\

probleme with global scope: styles defined for one component unintentionally affect the styling of other components. As the application grows, managing and debugging such style conflicts becomes increasingly challenging.


# Inline Level Styling
use the style attribute and pass it an object. If you want to add a dynamic expression use two {{}}.\
The first one is for the js expression and the second is for the object where you provide with key and value, sperated by ,
`style={{ color: color, padding: "10px" }}`.\
Important:
1. no dash (-) is allowed. As it's JS object, - is interpated as minus symbol. Delete the - and upperCase the next letter. `border-radius` will be `borderRadius`

2. If you have complex inline css you may want to exctract it to a variable
```jsx
const pStyle = {
	color: "red",
	padding: "20px"
	....
}
```
and use it in your inline css: `styles={pStyle}`
## Dynamic Level Styling
in the context of inline styling you can create condition. 
```jsx
const pStyle = {
	color: warning? "red" : "green",
	padding: "20px"
	....
}
```

# Module Level Styling: Local Scope
Styling approach where styles are scoped to individual components or modules rather than being applied globally. It aims to solve the problem of style leakage and conflicts that can occur in large-scale applications with complex component hierarchies. It allows developers to define styles that are specific to a particular component, ensuring that they won't interfere with other components or be affected by styles defined elsewhere. 

There are several approaches to achieve Module Level Styling in React. Code example provided onlt for the first approch since I dont like the others:

1. CSS Modules: CSS Modules is a popular technique where styles are written in regular CSS files and imported as JavaScript objects in React components. Each class name is scoped to the component, preventing style conflicts and providing a clear separation of concerns.\
Create a css file named componentName.module.css.

```jsx
// component.module.css
.button {
  background-color: blue;
  color: white;
  padding: 10px 20px;
  border: none;
  border-radius: 5px;
}

// Button.js
import React from 'react';
import styles from './button.module.css';

const Component = () => {
  return (
    <button className={styles.button}>
      Click me
    </button>
  );
};

export default Button;
```
2. CSS-in-JS Libraries: CSS-in-JS libraries, such as styled-components, emotion, or glamorous, allow developers to write component styles using JavaScript or a CSS-like syntax. These libraries generate unique class names or inline styles for each component, ensuring style encapsulation. 

3. CSS-in-JS with CSS Modules: This approach combines the benefits of CSS-in-JS and CSS Modules. It enables using CSS Modules' scoping mechanism while writing styles in JavaScript, offering a more dynamic and powerful styling solution.

## Advantages

1. Encapsulation: Styles are scoped to individual components, reducing the likelihood of style conflicts and making it easier to reason about the visual appearance of each component in isolation.
2. Reusability: Components can be easily reused across the application or even in different projects without worrying about unintended side effects on styles.
3. Modularity: Styles are closely tied to the components they belong to, enhancing the maintainability and separation of concerns in the codebase.
4. Performance: By scoping styles to specific components, unnecessary style computations and updates can be minimized, resulting in better performance.





