# JSON Server
you develop your front but the API is not ready, use JSON server library. You will get full fake REST API with zero coding
1. install : `npm install -g json-server`. If you install it globally you woin't see it in the package.json
2. create a db.json file in your project. it will be accesible via "http://localhost:3000/posts/1" for example
```json
{
  "posts": [
    { "id": 1, "title": "json-server", "author": "typicode" },
    { "id": 2, "title": "json-backend", "author": "flash" }
  ],
  "comments": [
    { "id": 1, "body": "some comment", "postId": 1 }
  ],
  "profile": { "name": "typicode" }
}
```
3. run the server `json-server --watch db.json --port 8003`.\
If you put the json file inside a folder, change the path.\
the port is not a must but since React listen on the 3000 port, you should change it

4. test that it works fine. Go to "http://localhost:8003/posts/1" and check that you get the requested data
5. change the prot of the backend server since react also listen on the same port
5. change the json file content for your needs

# useEffect Hook
useEffect is a React Hook that lets you synchronize a component with an external system. It called once (if there are no depdencies).
If you’re not trying to synchronize with some external system, you probably don’t need an Effect.
`useEffect(setup, dependencies?)`
Parameters

setup: The function with your Effect’s logic. Your setup function may also optionally return a cleanup function. When your component is added to the DOM, React will run your setup function. After every re-render with changed dependencies, React will first run the cleanup function (if you provided it) with the old values, and then run your setup function with the new values. After your component is removed from the DOM, React will run your cleanup function.

optional dependencies: a list like [dep1, dep2, dep3]  => props, state, and all the variables and functions declared directly inside your component body. If one of the declared depndencies is changed, the useEffect() function will be called again. 
If you omit this argument, your Effect will re-run after every re-render of the component. 

```js
  useEffect(() => {
    // effect logic
    const connection = createConnection(serverUrl, roomId);
    connection.connect();
    // cleanup function
    return () => {
      connection.disconnect();
    };
  }, [serverUrl, roomId]);
  // ...
```

# React StrictMode
React StrictMode render everything twice. If you put console.log("log") in your componenet you will see 2 logs not just one.
useEffect: When Strict Mode is on, React will run one extra development-only setup+cleanup cycle before the first real setup. This is a stress-test that ensures that your cleanup logic “mirrors” your setup logic and that it stops or undoes whatever the setup is doing. If this causes a problem, implement the cleanup function.

# useCallback Hook
useCallback is a React Hook that lets you **cache** a function definition between re-renders. 
`const cachedFn = (fn, dependencies)`
If there is a change to a variable, even if  you re-call the function, the function won't take the change under consideration since it's cached. you should add in this case the variable to the list of dependencies.\
If I don't use it with every render the function will have a diffrent memory address and will be treated as diffrent function. An example: includinbg a function inside useEffect dependecy list will create an infinate loop. With every rendering the function will be compared to the previous function that we be regarded as diffrent which will cause another re-render henche the infinite loop. If the function is defined inside useEffect you don't need this mechanisem.

# useRef Hook
for functions the solution is useCallback hook but for arrays and objects, which may cause the same problem, the solution is useRef hook.

# Custom Hook 
If you use a hook and you want to use it in diffrent component and make it reusablle you can create a custom hook.
1. create a js class
2. named the class useXxx.JS
3. export const and return something
```js
export const useXxx = () => {

}
```
4. import the class
5. use the Hook

# Loading State
when fetching data from a server or a database you can create a loading state which is a boolean. If the boolean is true and you are in loading mode, present something to the user.\
`const [loading, setLoading] = useState(false);`
before fetching data setLoading to true and after you get the data setLoading to false

# Handling Errors: Fetch
use try and catch so you can catch errors in case the http request was a bad one and also use if(!response.ok)...

# Aborting Fetch Request
1. create a AbortController
2. provide the fetch request with the abort object's signal attribute
3. when you ready to abort call the abort method
```js
const controller = new AbortController()
fetch('url', {signal: controller.signal})
controller.abort()
```
