
## Authentification 

### Theory
Angular send the credntial to the server, they are validated (or not) and the server say : 'its ok, the user is auth'
There is a diffrence between Single Page  App and Traditional App
Traditional web app: We use a Session. The session will be stoored on the server and on the client we will get a cookie
SPA:  Firebase doesn't store sessions. Stateless, RESTful API. But it's not only firebase, Any backend that I use to communicate with Angular is stateless since we ask only one page and no multiple pages so 
there is no point to save the state on the server since I query it (ask for a html page) only once.
Since the Session way doesn't work, the server send us a token and we should store it on the browser (localstorage)
Token: a long String the encode (not encrypt) some data about the auth status
Whenever I want to request a Protected resource (like a DB) I need to attach the token to the request and the server validate if it's a valid Token ( was generated by the server) or if it's a fake one / expired token 
If the token is valid, we get access, otherwise - we don't.
protected resource: When config. Firestore at the begining I choose the Test config. Everyone is able to read and write to the DB, and token isn't needed. The DB is not protected. This config need to be changed.
Don't store the info. wheather the user is auth or not in a boolean (isAuth), you can't send it to the server. The server wants more, Work with Tokens.

#### Firebase Token
We can manage the token through firebase, we don't need  to extract and store it manually. We don't need to worry about it's experation date since Firebase always give us a fresh Token with every request. If we log out the token will be destoryed.


### Practiqua

#### Protect the DB
In the console go to the Cloud Firestore -> [Rules](https://firebase.google.com/docs/rules/rules-language?hl=en&authuser=0)
```
allow read, write: if request.auth != null

```
click on Publish

#### 
1. Go to the Firebase console and activate it (you will have to choose a sign-in method)
2. Add the AngularFireAuthModule 
3. In the auth service inject the AngularFireAuth
 

#### Registering User
on the injected service call the 
```ts
.auth.createUserWithEmailAndPassword(email, password)

```
It return a promise. You can listen to sucess case or to an error
```ts
.then(result => {
  react to a sucess in auth
})
.catch(error => {
  react to an error
})

```

#### User Login
The method name is confusing, it's login what I am looking for but the method name is Sign In
```ts
.auth.signInWithEmailAndPassword(email, password)

```
It return a promise. You can listen to sucess case or to an error
You don't need to send the Token to the server. AngularFire do it automatically for you as long as you use the signInWithEmailAndPassword() to login.


#### User logout
```ts
.auth.signOut()
```
it will get rid of the token. Everything will work but you will get an error in the console "Missing or insufficient permissions"
This error appear because after logging out I am still listen to  the DB changes whenever I use snapshotChanges()/ valueChanges()
Solution: 
1. in the subscribe() you can manage this error
```
subscribe(res => {....}, error => {.....})
```
2. Cancell the subscription
create a field to hold the Subscription and create a method cancelSubscription
If you have more than one subscription you want to cancel you can create an array of Subscriptions
```
private firebaseSubscriptions: Subscription[]
```
and then add every Subscription you want to be able to cancel
```
this.firebaseSubscriptions.push(this.db.collection(...).valueChanges() etc...)
```
Create a cancellSubscription method with the 
```
this.firebaseSubscriptions.forEach(sub => sub.unsubscribe());
```
3. In the AuthService got to the logout() and call the cancellSubscription method that you have created


#### Listen to changes in Auth Status
1. in the Auth service create a method to initAuthListner
```
.authState.subscribe( user => {
  if (user){
    navigate to page x etc....
  }
  else {
    cancel subscription, navigate to the login page etc...
  }
  })
```
2. Where will you call this method? when the app starts
in the AppComponent:
immplement OnInit, inject the AuthService and inside ngOnInit call the initAuthListner method that you just created
