# React Introduction
library not a framework. Adding react rouiter, redux etc will make it behave as a framework.\
component: **small** **resuable** piece of code that defines a part of the UI and can be **nested** in other component.\
SPA: there is only one file index.html that is loaded.\

# Environment Setup
1. Install Node.js LTS version
2. Code editor: VS Code/ intelliJ
## npx vs npm:
+ npm (Node Package Manager): npm is the default package manager for Node.js. Used to manage packages (libraries, frameworks, tools, etc.) and their dependencies. npm provides commands to install, update, and remove packages, as well as running scripts defined in a package.json file.
+ npx (Node Package Runner): npx  is a tool that comes bundled with npm since version 5.2.0. It is used to execute (remeber x for excute) Node.js packages or binaries without having to install them globally or locally. With npx, you can run a package's command-line tool directly, even if the package is not installed in your project or globally on your machine. npx looks for the package in the local node_modules directory or installs it on the fly and executes it.

## VS code
to open you can cmd the folder and then `code .` inside the folder
extention: auto import, ES7 + React.., IntelliCode, Material Icon Theme, Material Theme Icon
setting: setting icon => setting (ctrl + ,) => search for:\
1.`emmet include lang` => add item `javascript` value `javascriptreact`
2. stick scroll: activate it  by clicking on the box

## Stackblitz
if you are in enviorment that is not prepared for fract (no IDE or Node.js) you can still work on a project
[Stackblitz](https://stackblitz.com/edit/react-g7585w?file=src%2FApp.js)
for installing packages you have a DEPENDENCIES accordion menu where you can search for a package and install it

# Create React App
`npx create-react-app $project_name` (will create a sub folder named $project_name) or `npx create-react-app .` (will exctract everything in the currant folder).\
`npm start`: running the app. You can access you app from your smartphone. Look for "On Your Network"
`Ctrl + C`: stopping the server

3 folders: 
+ node module: where all the dependencies are stored 
+ public: what is visible to the user: favicon, logo, index.html etc...
+ src: development folder
3 files:
+ package.json: list of all the dependencies, scripts, info about the app
+ gitignore
+ package-lock.json: generated by npm. Helps maintain dependency version consistency, improves installation reliability, and ensures that your project can be built reliably across different environments.

# React Behind the Scene
the user will be served only with the index.html file. React will convert all of the code you wrote as js, bundle them, make some magic, and create a bundle.js script file and will include it in the index.html

# React Boilerplate
When react start it search for an index.js file inside the src folder. All you code that you will write will be part referenced in index.js (indreictly) and when building the app all is put in one bundle.js
1. Create Virtual DOM: you call ReactDOM.createRoot and you reference the div where you want to inject the app
2. call the render() methode on the virtual DOM and pass it with JSX to render.\
it is a good practice to work with strick mode (for development only)
```js
root.render(
	<React.StrickMode>
		....
	</React.StrickMode>
	)
```

# Components: Class- and Function-Based
when creating a component.js file, the filenale should start with uppercase.
if you want to work with components, a generic structure - using function based component- will be:\
```js
export const App = ()=> {
	return (<div>...</div>)
}

```
class based component were used before react 16. You needed to export a class that extends Component. The syntax was:
```js
import React, {Component} from 'react'

 export default class App extends Component {
 	render() {
 		return()
 	}
 }
```

# JSX: In-Depth Introduction
Syntax extention for JS that let you write HTML like markup inside a JS file. Inside the JSX you can pass JS code, like variables etc... .\
There are some rules you must follow:
1. Return signle root element: you must return a signle element or wrap everything inside `<> ....</>` this is the same as `<React.Fragmenet>`
2. Close all tags: every element must be closed. `<br>`  will produce an error `<br />` won't.
3. CamelCase all (almost): In java script there are limitation. You can't use dashed or reserved words (like class) inside html attributs. The solution is to use camelCase. 

## Behind the scens
when you return `<div className="sidebar" />` react excute:
`React.createElement('div', {className: 'sidebar'})`


# Assets
Create an assets folder and put inside all your images etc.  Eevrything that is referenced directly inside the index.html (like favicon) should be part of the public folder and not the assets folder
