# JSON Server
you develop your front but the API is not ready, use JSON server library. You will get full fake REST API with zero coding
1. install : `npm install -g json-server`. If you install it globally you woin't see it in the package.json
2. create a db.json file in your project. it will be accesible via "http://localhost:3000/posts/1" for example
```json
{
  "posts": [
    { "id": 1, "title": "json-server", "author": "typicode" },
    { "id": 2, "title": "json-backend", "author": "flash" }
  ],
  "comments": [
    { "id": 1, "body": "some comment", "postId": 1 }
  ],
  "profile": { "name": "typicode" }
}
```
3. run the server `json-server --watch db.json --port 8003`.\
If you put the json file inside a folder, change the path.\
the port is not a must but since React listen on the 3000 port, you should change it

4. test that it works fine. Go to "http://localhost:8003/posts/1" and check that you get the requested data
5. change the prot of the backend server since react also listen on the same port
5. change the json file content for your needs

# useEffect Hook
useEffect is a React Hook that lets you synchronize a component with an external system. It called once (if there are no depdencies).
If you’re not trying to synchronize with some external system, you probably don’t need an Effect.
`useEffect(setup, dependencies?)`
Parameters

setup: The function with your Effect’s logic. Your setup function may also optionally return a cleanup function. When your component is added to the DOM, React will run your setup function. After every re-render with changed dependencies, React will first run the cleanup function (if you provided it) with the old values, and then run your setup function with the new values. After your component is removed from the DOM, React will run your cleanup function.

optional dependencies: a list like [dep1, dep2, dep3]  => props, state, and all the variables and functions declared directly inside your component body. If one of the declared depndencies is changed, the useEffect() function will be called again. 
If you omit this argument, your Effect will re-run after every re-render of the component. 

```js
  useEffect(() => {
    // effect logic
    const connection = createConnection(serverUrl, roomId);
    connection.connect();
    // cleanup function
    return () => {
      connection.disconnect();
    };
  }, [serverUrl, roomId]);
  // ...
```


# React StrictMode
React StrictMode render everything twice. If you put console.log("log") in your componenet you will see 2 logs not just one.
useEffect: When Strict Mode is on, React will run one extra development-only setup+cleanup cycle before the first real setup. This is a stress-test that ensures that your cleanup logic “mirrors” your setup logic and that it stops or undoes whatever the setup is doing. If this causes a problem, implement the cleanup function.
# List Output
# onClick Event
# useCallback Hook
# Custom Hook (useFetch)
# Loading State
# Handling Errors (try
# Aborting Fetch Request
# Infinite Loops
