# React: How To Deploy


## Netlify:
Note the after deploying Netlify will check the production/main branch for each commit. Any commit will trigger re-deploy 
- Login [Netlify](https://app.netlify.com/) using GitHub
- Under Team Overview or under Sites click on [ Add new site ]	- import An Exisiting Project
- Select the provider: Deploy with Github
- Repository Access > All Repository or Only select repository and select the repo you want to deploy
- Select the repository
- Click on Install
- Configure site and deploy: change setting if needed
- Click on Deploy


**Note:** Deploying Process will take 2-5 minutes to be active on Netlify.
**Error:** Check the log if you get an error > apply changes to the codebase > push them on ‘main’ branch.

### Errors
Netlify may be "Treating warnings as errors because process.env.CI = true" it means that the build will fail because of warnings and not errors. 
You can solve it by:
1. Correct them 
2. In Netlify set an Enviorment Vairbale {CI:false} .
3. Add a comment `//eslint-disable-next-line` above the line of code that create the error



### Set Environment Variable:
You should not push to git your env files since they may contains sensative data like api keys. That's why in gitignore you will find:\
.env.local, .env.development.local, .env.test.local, .env.production.local
Your app is dependant of thoose values but they are not found in the build since they were not pushed to git. You will add them manually to Netlify

- **Site settings > Build & deploy > Environment > Environment variables**
https://docs.netlify.com/configure-builds/environment-variables/
(Make sure to push new changes after setting env to make them effective)

### Change domain name:
- Change domain name on Netlify through ‘Site Settings’

### 404 Page Not Found Error:
Netlify has a "bug". If you navigate to an adress that does not exists you will get the Netlify 404 page and not the one you have created. It does not happen with other host suppliers. To fix it:
1. create a netlify.toml file in the same level of package.json
2. copy pase this inside the file
3. add - commit - push
4. the push the the prod branch should trigger re deploy and the problem is fixed
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/58065603/netlify-renders-404-on-page-refresh-using-react-and-react-router
- https://www.netlify.com/blog/2019/01/16/redirect-rules-for-all-how-to-configure-redirects-for-your-static-site/

---

## Vercel:
https://vercel.com/login

- Login with GitHub
- Click on “Add New” > Project
- Select the repository
- Click on Deploy 
**Note:** Deploying Process will take 2-5 minutes to be active on Vercel.
**Error:** Check the log if you get an error > apply changes to the codebase > push them on ‘main’ branch.

To set Environment Variable:
- Settings > Environment Variables
(Make sure to push new changes after setting env to make them effective)

To change domain name:
- Change domain name on Vercel through ‘View Domains’ on Dashbaord
- Click on Edit > Change > Save

---

## Render (Backend)
https://render.com/

Locally
- Create a folder ‘codebook-mock-server’
- npm init
- Install express, json-server, json-server-auth
- Create index.js, add ‘data’ folder and .gitignore
- Push to Github

On Render, 
- Click on ‘New’ > ‘Web Service’
- Select the Git Repository and deploy 
**Note:** Deploying Process will take 10-15 minutes to be active on Render.
**Error:** Check the log if you get an error > apply changes to the codebase > push them on ‘main’ branch.

---

- Others:
- https://github.com/open-cli-tools/concurrently