# Redux 
Redux is a pattern and library for managing and updating application state, using events called "actions".
## Install
npm install react-redux@8
npm install @reduxjs/toolkit
Install Redux DevTools (a browser addon)
Documentation: https://redux-toolkit.js.org/

## Project Structure
1. Create a store folder and inside it create:
2. store.js
3. for each slice of info you want to manage in the store, create a js file finish with the keyword "slice"

## Dictionary
**Slice:** A "slice" is a collection of Redux reducer logic and actions for a single feature in your app, typically defined together in a single file. The name comes from splitting up the root Redux state object into multiple "slices" of state.
**Action:** An action is a plain JavaScript object that has a type field. You can think of an action as an event that describes something that happened in the application. An action object can have other fields with additional information about what happened. By convention, we put that information in a field called payload.
**useSelector hook:** lets our component extract whatever pieces of data it needs from the Redux store state.
**useDispatch hook:** returns a reference to the dispatch function from the Redux store. You may use it to dispatch actions as needed.
**<Provider> component:** makes the Redux store available to any nested components that need to access the Redux store.
## Basic Steps To Follow:
Create ‘slice’ for data with name, initialState and reducers
Get actions from slice.actions and export them
Export reducers
Import reducer inside store.js and register it
Export store
Cover the entire application with Provider with access to {store}
Steps to perform operations:
Import the actions (add/remove)
Use useDispatch so we can call actions
(To change anything in store, we need to dispatch the action)
Use useSelector to get state information (cart/counter)
Extension:
Redux Devtool
https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/redux-devtools/lmhkpmbekcpmknklioeibfkpmmfibljd?hl=en


# Slice and Action
# Reducers: Add and Remove
# Redux Store State
# Project Deployment
