# Introduction to GitHub Action Workflows

GitHub Actions is a powerful automation tool provided by GitHub that allows you to define custom workflows and automate various tasks within your software development process. 
+ build
+ test
+ package
+ release
+ deploy

With GitHub Actions, you can streamline your development pipeline, automate testing, deployment, and other repetitive tasks, all directly from your GitHub repository.


## Overview of GitHub Action Workflow

A GitHub Action workflow is a series of steps, executed automatically in response to specific events occurring within your repository. These events can range from pushing code to the repository, creating pull requests, or even external triggers.\
In essence, a workflow is like a recipe that outlines the sequence of actions that need to be performed whenever a certain event takes place. This can include building and testing your code, creating release assets, deploying applications, and more.
**Defenition:** Workflows are defined in YAML file. stored in the `.github/workflows` directory of your repository.
**Running:** the recipe will run when triggered by an event in the repository / manually / defined schedule.

GitHub provides a wide range of pre-defined actions that you can include in your workflows, and you can also create custom actions to suit your specific needs.

## Exploring Workflow Components – Events
Event - > Workflow -> Actions.\
Events are the triggers that initiate the execution of a GitHub Action workflow. An event could be anything from a code push to a new pull request, an issue comment, or even a scheduled event. Here are some common types of events:

- **Push Event**: This event occurs when code is pushed to the repository. You can configure workflows to trigger whenever code is pushed to specific branches.

- **Pull Request Event**: When a pull request is opened, synchronized, or closed, this event can be used to trigger workflows. This is particularly useful for automating code reviews and testing before merging.

- **Issue Comment Event**: This event is triggered when a comment is made on an issue or pull request. You can use it to perform actions like labeling, assigning, or notifying team members.

- **Scheduled Event**: You can schedule workflows to run at specific times or intervals using the `schedule` event. This is handy for tasks like regular code backups or automated reports.

- **External Events**: GitHub Actions also supports triggering workflows from external sources using webhooks. This can be useful for integrating with third-party services or triggering actions from other repositories.

When creating a workflow, you define the event that will trigger it and then specify the sequence of steps that the workflow should follow. These steps can include setting up the environment, running tests, deploying applications, and more.



## Exploring Workflow Components – Job, Step, and Runner
A workflow consists of one or more jobs. Each job is composed of one or more steps. Steps are individual units of work that are executed sequentially. If a job has no steps an eror will arise. A workflow runs on a runner, each job recive a new instance of a runner.

**Job:** set of steps (tasks) that are executed on a specific environment (runner). Jobs run in parallel by default, which can help speed up the workflow's execution time. You can also configure jobs to run sequentially if needed. For example, you might have a "Build" job and a "Test" job in your workflow.

**Step:** a shell command, a script, or a [pre-defined action](https://github.com/marketplace?type=actions). For instance, a "Build" job might have steps to install dependencies, compile code, and generate artifacts.

**Runner:** virtual machine that execute the jobs in your workflow. Runners can be hosted by GitHub (Linux, Windows, Mac) or self-hosted on your own infrastructure. Runners are responsible for setting up the environment, executing steps, and reporting the results back to GitHub. You can customize runners to meet your specific requirements.

## Running the Workflow and Reading the Logs

Once you've defined your workflow and committed the YAML file to your repository, GitHub Actions will automatically start running the workflow whenever the specified triggering event occurs. You can monitor the progress of your workflow from the "Actions" tab in your repository.

As the workflow runs, you'll see live logs that provide details about each step's execution. These logs include the output of commands, any errors encountered, and the overall status of the workflow. If any step fails, GitHub will highlight the issue, allowing you to quickly identify and address the problem.

### Example
In this example, we have three jobs: build, test, and deploy. The test job depends on the build job, and the deploy job depends on the test job, creating a dependency chain.

```yml
name: CI/CD Workflow # defines the name of the workflow.

on: # specifies the event trigger that will activate the workflow (in this case, any push to the main branch).
  push:
    branches:
      - main
  workflow_dispatch: # Allows you yo run this workflow manually from the Action tab. for this to work the yml file should be commit on the main/default branch    

jobs: # define different sections of work that the workflow will perform.
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest # Specifies the type of runner environment

    steps:
      - name: Checkout Repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v2 # reference pre-built GitHub Actions

      - name: Set up Node.js
        uses: actions/setup-node@v2
        with: # provide additional options or arguments to the action.
          node-version: 14

      - name: Install Dependencies
        run: npm install

      - name: Build Application
        run: npm run build

  test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest # Specifies the type of runner environment

    needs: build # depends on the job build. Will run it after build had been finished

    steps:
      - name: Checkout Repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v2

      - name: Set up Node.js
        uses: actions/setup-node@v2
        with:
          node-version: 14

      - name: Install Dependencies
        run: npm install

      - name: Run Tests
        run: npm test

  deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest # Specifies the type of runner environment

    needs: test

    steps:
      - name: Checkout Repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v2

      - name: Deploy Application
        run: |
          echo "Deploying the application..."
          # Add your deployment commands here



```
## Conclusion
Understanding the core components of GitHub Action workflows – jobs, steps, and runners – is essential for creating effective automation pipelines. By structuring your workflows with well-defined jobs and steps, and by utilizing runners to execute them, you can efficiently automate tasks and ensure the smooth execution of your software development process. Furthermore, monitoring the workflow's progress and reading the logs enables you to troubleshoot and maintain the quality of your automated processes.






















GitHub Actions provide a flexible and robust way to automate your software development workflows. By understanding the basics of GitHub Action workflows and their components, you can create efficient, automated processes that enhance collaboration, code quality, and deployment speed within your development team. In the upcoming sections, we'll dive deeper into creating and configuring GitHub Action workflows to suit your project's needs.