# Overview  
book: Full Stack Quarkus and React
author: Marc Nuri San Felix
[project files](https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Full-Stack-Quarkus-and-React)

## What is Quarkus
Java framework, cloud orientated [free open source](https://github.com/quarkiverse) project that was initially released in March 2019. The main goals of Quarkus are to improve the application’s startup time, its memory footprint, and the developer experience. Quarkus was built from the ground up to be cloud-native from the start. When Quarkus was designed, the team decided to rely on existing tools, frameworks, and standards instead of building something new from scratch. Quarkus combines the traditional imperative coding style with the cloud-native friendly reactive coding style approach. 

### Tech
Quarkus uses the:
- Java Enterprise Edition (EE) Contexts and Dependency Injection (CDI) standard for dependency injection; 
- MicroProfile, a community-driven specification to optimize Java EE for a microservice architecture and for configuration and monitoring;
- Java Persistence API (JPA) annotations to define the object-relational mapping (ORM); 
- Jakarta RESTful Web Services (JAX-RS) annotations to define the REST controllers; and many more technologies in a long, ever-growing list.

The learning curve is very gentle since most of it is based on proven community standards and libraries.\
Quarkus makes it extremely easy to create native executables for your platform. The framework provides almost transparent integration with GraalVM, a high-performance Java Development Kit (JDK) distribution that allows you to compile your Java code into a standalone binary executable.


# Bootstrapping a Quarkus application
There are more than ne way to create Quarkus app
+ [Web Page](https://code.quarkus.io/)
+ [CLI](https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling)
+ Running a Maven goal
+ IntelliJ UI

### WebPage
1. Navigate to the [Web Page](https://code.quarkus.io/)
2. Set the Maven Group: The generated project will include a package named with this value 
3. In the Artifact field, define the Maven artifact ID. 
4. Add the required dependencies. Start with adding RESTEasy Reactive. You can add others later.
5. Click on the Generate your app button and download a ZIP package with the bootstrapped project.
6. Extract the generated ZIP package  to the project’s definitive location.
7. Open the project with your IDE

### CLI
run `quarkus --version` to see if the CLIis installed on you machine. If not, install it
with Chocolatey : ```choco install quarkus```


#### Creating App
`quarkus create app --help`: display options for creating projects
`quarkus --help`: will show you all the avaliable commends
navigate to the folder you want to create the folder in with cd
`quarkus create app $artifactId`: Create a project with groupId=org.acme, artifactId=artifactId, and version=1.0.0-SNAPSHOT
`quarkus create app $groupId:artifactId`: Create a project with groupId=groupId, artifactId=artifactId, and version=1.0.0-SNAPSHOT
`quarkus create app $groupId:artifactId:version`: Create a project with groupId=groupId, artifactId=artifactId, and version=version


## Extensions
Most of Quarkus extensions are build-time oriented. Most analysis and optimizations happen at build time, so none of this processing needs to be performed during the application startup. The result is an application that starts up nearly instantly.
To learn more about some of the extensions go to the Maven and dependencies.md file
### Adding extensions
`quarkus ext ls`: list all extensions
`quarkus ext add $dependency`: The Quarkus CLI will add  one or more extensions to your project
`quarkus ext rm $dependency`: will remove an extension


## Running the application in dev mode
You can run your application in dev mode that enables live coding using:
```
./mvnw compile quarkus:dev

```
NOTE: Quarkus now ships with a [Dev UI]( http://localhost:8080/q/dev/), which is available in dev mode only at http://localhost:8080/q/dev/.

### Debugging 
IntelliJ: it can be done in one of two ways
+ in the app console (with the Quarkus logo) click on detach a debugger 
+ Run -> Attach to process

### Continuous Testing
When Quarkus is run in continuous testing mode, it will detect code changes to both code and tests. For each change it detects, it will re-run the relevant tests for the affected code.
Just as with the development mode, we can run a Maven command to start the continuous testing mode as follows:
```
./mvnw quarkus:test
```
### Packaging the application

The final step to being able to distribute and run the application would be to package it.
Besides the native mode, which we already analyzed in the Profiles section, Quarkus offers the following package types:

+ fast-jar: This is the default packaging mode. It creates a highly optimized runner JAR package, along with a directory and its dependencies.
+ uber-jar: This mode will generate a fat JAR containing all of the required dependencies. This JAR package is suitable for distribution of the application on its own.
+ native: This mode uses GraalVM to package your application into a single native binary executable file for your platform.
+ native-sources: This type is intended for advanced users. It generates the files that will be needed by GraalVM to create the native image binary. It’s like the native packaging type but stops before triggering the actual GraalVM invocation. This allows performing the GraalVM invocation in a separate step, which might be useful for CI/CD pipelines.

#### Setting the packaging mode
You can control the packaging mode by : 
1. setting the quarkus.package.type Maven property. You can set this property in the pom.xml properties section 
2. via the command line when running the Maven commands:

```
./mvnw -D"quarkus.package.type=uber-jar" clean package
```

You can package the application running the following command:
```
./mvnw clean package
```
You should now be able to run the application by executing the following:
```
java -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar
```

# Project files
## Maven

The project includes a Maven Wrapper setup. 
Maven Wrapper : tool that allows project users to run a consistent version of Maven across different build environments. The tool also allows you to run Maven without the need to have a global Maven installation. You should be able to invoke Maven goals from a terminal in your project root. 
The project includes the .mvn directory and the mvnw and mvnw.cmd executable files.

### Running Maven - Different OS
Linux or macOS environment: execute the wrapper by running ./mvnw. 
Windows: ./mvnw from a PowerShell terminal, or mvnw from a standard cmd.exe terminal. 

## Analyzing pom.xml
The Maven project is defined in the Project Object Model pom.xml file. This XML file is the main unit of work for Maven and collects all the information and configuration details that will be used by Maven to build the project.

### Maven coordinates (GAV)
The Maven coordinates, also known as GAV, are the minimum required references for a project. These are the groupId, artifactId, and version fields that we defined in the web-based wizard when we bootstrapped the project.\
These fields act as a unique identifier for the project and enable you to reference it in other projects just like a coordinate system.

### Maven properties
inside the pom you will see reference to properties. ${x.y.z} where are they come from? they are found inside the pom.xml under  <properties> block. The following are the most important:
+  maven.compiler.release: This property sets the Java version for the project. This property is used by the Maven Compiler Plugin, and it was introduced in version 3.6 of the plugin. This property relies on the other compiler-plugin.version property, which you shouldn’t change – or at least make sure it’s always > 3.6.
+  quarkus.platform.version: This property specifies the Quarkus version in use. Whenever a new Quarkus version is released, this is the property that you should update to upgrade your project. For patch versions and non-breaking releases, this change should be enough. For other version updates, you might need to change some parts of your code too.
 ### Dependency management
 This definition is important to set the version of the Quarkus extension dependencies. It’s using placeholders for the following Maven properties found in the properties section to reference the effective dependency. Under the hood, Maven is copying the dependency management section of the io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-bom, Quarkus’ Bill of Materials (BOM), artifact to the current project. This process enforces the use of a consistent version for all of the provided Quarkus extensions that we’ll see in the next section, Dependencies.
 
 ### Dependencies
 The following block in the project object model is the dependencies definition. These are the actual library dependencies of our project. Let’s see what each of the bootstrapped dependencies does.
 + RESTEasy Reactive: RESTEasy Reactive is a Quarkus-specific implementation of the JAX-RS specification based on Vert.x. It takes full advantage of Quarkus’ reactive non-blocking capabilities, which improve the overall application performance. 
JAX-RS is a Java EE or Jakarta EE API specification that enables the implementation of REST web services. It provides common annotations such as @Path, @GET, and @POST, which can be used to annotate classes and methods to implement HTTP endpoints. If you’ve dealt with J2EE, Java EE, or Jakarta EE before, you might already be familiar with these annotations.
+ Quarkus ArC : dependency injection solution provided by Quarkus. 
+ Quarkus JUnit5:  the main dependency for the Quarkus testing framework. It provides the @QuarkusTest annotation, which is the main entry point for the test framework. 
+ Rest Assured: it’s not provided by Quarkus, but it’s the recommended way to test its endpoints. You can use it to create the integration tests for your application\


You can also use:
+ JKube: a Maven plugin that generates all of the required configurations for your application to be able to deploy it to Kubernetes; for this reason, it’s not necessary to keep extra configuration files such as Docker or Kubernetes YAML files.
+ 
### Plugins
Along with the more common Maven plugins, the build plugins section contains an entry for the Quarkus Maven plugin. This plugin provides Maven goals for most of the Quarkus features. Whenever we invoke any Maven command with a `quarkus:` prefix, this is the plugin that will be responsible for the execution.

### Profiles
The bootstrapped project contains a single profile with the native ID. We can activate this profile either by using the Maven profile selection flag, -Pnative, or by providing a -Dnative system property.\

The profile provides some specific configurations to run tests that partially override the one provided in the build or plugins section. However, the most important part is `quarkus.package.type`: instructs Quarkus to build a native binary for our platform. When we package our application with this profile (./mvnw clean package -Pnative), we’ll get a binary file instead of a standard Java archive (JAR) package.

## source files
There is a  src subdirectory that contains the project sources
. 
### Application properties
The application.properties file is located in the src/main/resources directory. This file contains the main configuration for our project. \

Under the hood, Quarkus uses SmallRye Config, which is an implementation of the Eclipse MicroProfile Configuration feature spec. . For each line, the config key and the config value are separated by an = sign.
The application.properties file can also be used to define values that can be injected into your application.
Let’s say you defined the following property:
```
publisher.name=AliceInThe
```

You could inject the preceding property into the application using the following snippet:
```
@ConfigProperty(name = "publisher.name")
String publisherName;

```

### Profiles
Quarkus provides the option to build and execute the application based on different profile configurations. Depending on the target environment, you might want to select a specific profile that provides a valid configuration for that environment.

Quarkus has three profiles :
+ dev: which is activated in development mode. Whenever you change any of the Java application source or resource files, Quarkus detects these changes and performs a hot deployment. You just need to refresh your browser for the changes to take effect.
```
./mvnw quarkus:dev
```
+ test: which is activated when the tests are executed.
+ prod: which is the default profile when the others don’t apply.

to configure an option for a specific profile, you need to prefix the configuration key with % and the profile name, except for prod, which is the default profile and doesn’t require a prefix.
In general, we’ll be adding configuration for prod, and provide overrides for dev mode when needed.

### Static resources
The project contains an index.html file in the src/main/resources/META-INF/resources directory. This file will be automatically served from the underlying application’s HTTP server. When pointing a browser to the root path of the application (http://localhost:8080), you will be greeted with this landing page that was bootstrapped for us\
By default, Quarkus will serve any static file that is located in this directory. 

### Docker files

The project contains some example Docker files in src/main/docker. These files can be used to create container images for your application. Alternative for using the docker files is to  use Eclipse JKube, which requires a simpler configuration and doesn’t need these Docker files.


